                                3 D - S T A R
                                Version  0.91

INTRODUCTION  
  
  3DSTAR is a program designed to show nearby stars from different viewing
perspectives.  We on Earth are only able to see the stars from one place,
Earth, which doesn't give us much perspective on how far away different
stars are, or how bright they really are.  This program allows you to
travel through this part of the galaxy, exploring our neighborhood of space
out to a few thousand light-years.  Some of the features of this version
are:

± Actual (X,Y,Z) galactic coordinates of 333 stars, including:  
    The 25 brightest stars (as seen from Earth)
    The 26 nearest stars to Earth (including Sol)
    The brighter stars of every major constellation

± Add more stars with the program 3DDATA.BAS, using their equatorial
  coordinates (RA, DEC), distance in light-years, absolute magnitude,
  and spectral class.

± Apparent magnitudes calculated as you travel through space, so you
  can see the stars' correct brightness relative to each other.

± Choose any starting location measured from (0,0,0) at Sol, and any
  course from Galactic Longitude 0½ to 360½ and from Galactic Latitude
  -90½ to +90½.

± Choose any speed, even millions or billions of times the speed of light.

± VGA 640x480 16-color graphics, with the palette altered for better
  simulation of spectral colors.

± Information bar displays direction and distance info on any star.


  You should have the following files:

3DSTAR.DOC              This documentation
3DSTAR.EXE              The main program
3DDATA.EXE              Enter stars into the database
3DSTAR.DAT              The star database
3DSTAR.BAS              QuickBasic source code

GETTING STARTED

  Type "3DSTAR" to start the program.  After loading the stars from the 
3DSTAR.DAT file into memory, the program will ask you for starting 
parameters.  The first time you run the program, hit <ENTER> seven times to
accept the default values.

  The top part of the screen will display the stars, and the lower part has
the current status.  At Magnification = 1, the screen goes from -180½ on the
left side of the screen to +180½ on the right side of the screen.  The
center of the screen is at 0½ (straight ahead).  In the up-down direction,
+90½ is at the top of the screen and -90½ is at the bottom.  If you were in
a spaceship looking straight out the right window, for example, you would
be looking 90½ which is exactly 3/4 of the screen from the left side.  If
you were looking out the left window, you would be facing -90½ (or 270½)
and that is 1/4 of the screen from the left side.  For a more realistic
view of just straight ahead, you may want to increase the magnification
to 4 or so, which will show you the area of the sky from 315½ to 45½ 
(left-right) and from -22.5½ to +22.5½ (up-down).  But for now, leave it 
on magnification 1 so you can see the whole sky at once.

  You are heading in the direction 0½ mark 0½ (see the "Course" display), 
which is directly towards the Galactic Core.  The bright yellow star above
and to the right of center is Sol, our sun.  Notice how fast it moves as
we pass it at a distance of 0.14 light-years.  The yellow star just to
the right of center is Alpha Centauri, closest star to Sol at only 4.3
light-years.  The bright white star on the right side of the screen, a
little below the Galactic plane, is Sirius.  The constellation to the right
of Sirius is Orion.  Up in the upper-left corner of the screen is the
Big Dipper.  Its shape is a little distorted because it is near the edge
of a spherical map plotted on a flat screen, the same reason Greenland
looks so big on flat maps.  About a fourth of the screen from the left
side (that's 90½ to the left) is a triangle of three bright white stars.
Those stars are Deneb, Vega, and Altair, and they are known as the
"Summer Triangle" because they are high above the horizon on summer
evenings in the northern hemisphere.

  Soon you will pass Sol and it will fall behind you, heading in the
direction of Orion.  Alpha Centauri is slowly moving away from the center,
passing the blue star Beta Centauri, then the two stars Acrux and Beta
Crucis.

  Here are the keys that are currently available while the program is
running:

  Z ........... Zoom in by 2x
  z ........... UnZoom by 2x
  A ........... Speed up (or Accelerate)
  a ........... Slow down
  2, 4, 6, 8 .. turn ship by 5½ in that direction; use the keypad with
                Num Lock on
  N ........... Next star on information display
  n ........... Last star on information display


HISTORY

Early 1992 ......... Started writing simple 3DSTAR program, with random stars
                     and no differences in brightness, color, etc.  Problem
                     with keeping stars in the right quadrants halted
                     progress.

December 28, 1992 .. Started working on it again.  Also started trying to
                     figure out how to translate spherical coordinates from
                     one system to another, for 3DSTAR to translate to the
                     observers coordinates and viewing angle, and also for 
                     3DDATA to convert from equatorial to galactic coords.

December 30, 1992 .. Derived spherical translation equations from 2-d polar
                     coordinate system rotation equations and got both
                     3DSTAR and 3DDATA working, but without magnitudes and
                     spectral types.

December 31, 1993 .. Started working on apparent magnitudes, had problem
                     with stars leaving glitches on the screen after they
                     move.

January 2, 1994 .... Finished version 0.01, 3DSTAR now works at any viewing
                     angle, from any point in space.  Spectral types and
                     apparent magnitudes working perfectly, with no screen
                     glitches.

January 30, 1994 ... Finished version 0.90, compiled with QuickBasic 4.5.
                     The StarMap still is not finished but the palette has
                     been adjusted (no more brown or green stars!) and the
                     stars are now points instead of disks.  Looks much
                     better and runs much faster than the QBasic interpreted
                     program did, and the source code is now structured 
                     with subprograms and functions for easier modification.

February 2, 1994 ... Finished version 0.91, the database now has 333 stars
                     (0.90 only had 63).  Information bar added.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

??????? ??, 1994 ... Once the StarMap, menu windows, etc. are finished I
                     will release the program (version 1.0) as shareware.



